The Cost of Working in Education

People talk about how teachers are underpaid and overworked and there’s talk of how college is so expensive. Let’s be clear, I agree with both of these statements as they directly impact my life. But what I want to focus on is the cost of working in higher education for me. I share this because I know I’m not alone. There’s a whole Facebook group of people who want to leave my career field for the variety of costs. And people say, so leave, but maybe you feel called and when you don’t, a career change is incredibly difficult.

I’m in my late 30s and I have two master’s degrees (one started in a doctorate program), crushing debt, an educator spouse, and am worried about the opportunity to have children. This article was inspired, for lack of a better word, by the fact that my female spouse and I went to pick out a donor for our insemination and we didn’t have enough cash or credit to purchase two vials, and I have spent today sobbing. Between student loans from all my degrees (mostly that master’d out doctorate), credit card debt from illness, injury, multiple moves, and unemployment, and other various things like the one car we share…I’m dying under $300,000 in debt. That doesn’t even include the house that we can’t afford that came with a daily 5-hour roundtrip commute.

If it sounds like I’m ranting and between tears, it’s because I am. But here’s the deal…. I was financially ok after college, I would’ve been fine. But then I went to graduate school, which is required for my field. If you want a professional “desk” type job in higher education and the opportunity to move up, you are REQUIRED to have a master’s degree…even for many entry-level roles. Here’s the clincher, if you want to be a professor or move up to an AVP role and beyond, you have to get a Ph.D. (or some other doctorate). A fucking Ph.D.! So, I pursued a doctorate, that was supposed to be covered by my tuition benefits, but it was a taxable benefit — which meant I had no paycheck left and I hated it.

Because here’s the thing…. higher education, or my specific area of student affairs…doesn’t pay well. My first job out of graduate school, with a master’s degree, paid $26,000. My second? $30,000. So, I’ve got debt from six years of school and I’m making $26,000!!! Interns in tech make almost that over the summer! And on top of it, student affairs jobs are often 50–60 hour per week jobs. So, if you have the energy after dealing with student crisis, emergency response, and adult babysitting to get a second job, you may not even have the time. Especially if your role involves you being on call to respond to said crisis, alcohol intoxication, etc. The work is important and valuable, I mean I’ve done it for over a decade. But I’m exhausted and I’ve never been able to crawl out of this financial hole. I’ve gotten one raise in 14 years and I’ve had to move every time I wanted a raise or a promotion. Student affairs treats people like shit and pays them like interns.

I make more now, but I also work in San Francisco, so as a director with 14 years of experience, I make an entry level salary of the corporate sector and I spend my life commuting to where I was able to buy a house in a neighborhood that I don’t trust to leave my gate, door, or car unlocked and I installed outdoor lights and cameras all around the house. Why? We moved away to try and buy a house and landed in a toxic job and unemployment, so we moved back and this is what we could afford. At the time we moved, renting closer to work would’ve been more expensive and we wanted a house and a yard for our future children. Also, I’m married to a teacher, who I love dearly and makes getting through days like today possible, but her salary is only slightly more than mine.

How can we move forward? How can we make a change? Because job searching for a career change is a life suck. I’ve been doing it on and off for the past five years and I really need something to work out.

You may read this and think wow, she’s going to hurt herself or depression must be really tough. I don’t want to minimize those things at all, they’re not where I am though. Yes, depression is tough, and I want to remind you that sometimes the happiest presenting people aren’t actually letting you in to see their struggles. And suicide is seen as an out for those who see no other option, which is often because the dark shadows of depression and anxiety cloud their vision. But we all get down at times and there’s usually a trigger. For me, it was that my wife and are getting older and all I want to be is a parent, but today, we can’t afford it, and I’m worried we’re going to get too old before we can.

Going back to the title…what is the cost of working in education? For some of us, it’s everything. Physical health, emotional health, financial health, positive outlook, and appreciation at work. My job emotionally drains me, my commute has me struggling to find time for physical activity and healthy eating, my salary has me constantly worrying about how we can afford all our bills, healthy food, and said commute, let alone a child. And yet I’m in this field that has required so much education, but barely pays me enough to live, let alone pay those loans off. I’ve made mistakes that I wish I could go back and fix, but I can’t so I just have to think about how to move forward. And I hope that someday, a savings account will be a reality and I won’t worry about if I can pay more than the minimum payment and pay everything.